J. Robert Oppenheimer: Complete Collection of Quotes and Speeches

Famous Trinity Test Quote:
"Now I am become Death, the destroyer of worlds." (From Bhagavad Gita, Chapter 11, Verse 32)
Context: Recounted in 1965 NBC documentary about Trinity test

Trinity Test Reflection (Full Quote):
"We knew the world would not be the same. A few people laughed; a few people cried. Most people were silent. I remembered the line from the Hindu scripture, the Bhagavad Gita; Vishnu is trying to persuade the prince that he should do his duty, and to impress him, takes on his multi-armed form and says, 'Now I am become Death, the destroyer of worlds.' I suppose we all thought that, one way or another."

On Nuclear Weapons:
"I don't know if we can be trusted with such a weapon. But I know the Nazis can't."

"The atomic bomb made the prospect of future war unendurable. It has led us up those last few steps to the mountain pass; and beyond there is a different country."

"In some sort of crude sense, which no vulgarity, no humor, no overstatement can quite extinguish, the physicists have known sin; and this is a knowledge which they cannot lose."

"We made the bomb to be used. We gave it to the military; they used it. I don't think you can blame them."

On Science and Knowledge:
"It is a profound and necessary truth that the deep things in science are not found because they are useful; they are found because it was possible to find them."

"There is no place for dogma in science. The scientist is free, and must be free to ask any question, to doubt any assertion, to seek for any evidence, to correct any errors."

"No man should escape our universities without knowing how little he knows."

"The scientist is not responsible for the laws of nature, but it is a scientist's job to find out how these laws operate."

"Both the man of science and the man of art live always at the edge of mystery, surrounded by it."

On Moral Responsibility:
"When we deny the EVIL within ourselves, we dehumanize ourselves, and we deprive ourselves not only of our own destiny but of any possibility of dealing with the EVIL of others."

"Knowledge cannot be pursued without morality."

"The physicists have known sin; and this is a knowledge which they cannot lose."

Philosophical Reflections:
"The optimist thinks this is the best of all possible worlds. The pessimist fears it is true."

"I need physics more than friends."

"Access to the Vedas is the greatest privilege this century may claim over all previous centuries."

On Education and Learning:
"The best way to send information is to wrap it up in a person."

"No man should escape our universities without knowing how little he knows."

"There are children playing in the streets who could solve some of my top problems in physics, because they have modes of sensory perception that I lost long ago."

Security Hearing Quotes (1954):
"I feel I have blood on my hands." (said to President Truman)

"I have had a continuing smoldering fury about the treatment of this country of Dr. [Edward] Teller."

On the Hydrogen Bomb:
"It is clear to me that if these weapons are to be tested, they should be tested by the nation which intends to use them first."

"The program we had in 1949 was a tortured thing that you could well argue did not make a great deal of technical sense."

On International Relations:
"The atomic bomb made the prospect of future war unendurable."

"We live in a world in which knowledge of the most practical importance is a secret."

Personal Philosophy:
"I am become death, destroyer of worlds... I suppose we all thought that, one way or another."

"It is proper to the role of the scientist that he not merely find new truth and communicate it to his fellows, but that he teach, that he try to bring the most honest and intelligible account of new knowledge to all who will try to learn."

On Science and Society:
"Scientists are not delinquents. Our work has changed the conditions in which men live, but the use made of these changes is the problem of governments, not of scientists."

"Any man whose errors take ten years to correct is quite a man."

On Hindu Philosophy (Bhagavad Gita):
"The Gita is the most beautiful philosophical song existing in any known tongue."

"I am become Time, destroyer and creator of the worlds." (Alternative translation he preferred)

Late Life Reflections:
"I think it is true that experience is the only teacher. But I think it is also true that the only way you can learn is through making mistakes."

"I have become death, destroyer of worlds... I made one great mistake in my life... when I signed the letter to President Roosevelt recommending that atom bombs be made; but there was some justification - the danger that the Germans would make them first."

On Art and Science:
"Both the man of science and the man of art live always at the edge of mystery, surrounded by it; both always, as the measure of their creation, have had to do with the harmonization of what is new with what is familiar, with the balance between novelty and synthesis, with the struggle to make partial order in total chaos."

Final Thoughts on Nuclear Age:
"The general notions about human understanding... which are illustrated by discoveries in atomic physics are not in the nature of things wholly unfamiliar, wholly unheard of, or new. Even in our own culture, they have a history, and in Buddhist and Hindu thought a more considerable and central place."

Farewell Speech at Los Alamos (1945):
"If atomic bombs are to be added as new weapons to the arsenals of a warring world, or to the arsenals of nations preparing for war, then the time will come when mankind will curse the names of Los Alamos and of Hiroshima."

On Knowledge and Wisdom:
"The scientist is not responsible for the laws of nature. It is his job to find out how these laws operate."

"We know too much for one man to know much."

Context Notes:
- Many quotes from security hearing transcripts (1954)
- NBC documentary interviews (1965)
- Speeches at Institute for Advanced Study
- Letters to colleagues and government officials
- Los Alamos farewell address (1945)
- Various academic lectures and conferences

Speaking Style Characteristics:
- Formal, precise language
- Frequent references to literature and philosophy
- Measured, contemplative tone
- Often melancholic or reflective
- References to classical texts and Eastern philosophy
- Scientific precision in expression
- Moral gravity in discussing nuclear weapons